25143_Itokawa
 25143 Itokawa ( / ˌ iː t oʊ ˈ k ɑː w ə / ; Japanese : イトカワ ,いとかわ,糸川 [itokaɰa] ) is a stony sub-kilometer asteroid , classified as near-Earth object of the Apollo group and potentially hazardous asteroid , that measures approximately 350 meters in diameter. It was the first asteroid to be the target of a sample return mission , the Japanese space probe Hayabusa , and the smallest asteroid photographed and visited by a spacecraft . Discovery and naming The asteroid was discovered in 1998 by the LINEAR project at the Lincoln Laboratory's Experimental Test Site in Socorro, New Mexico. It was given the provisional designation 1998 SF 36 . This minor planet was named after Hideo Itokawa (1912–1999), a Japanese rocket scientist. The official naming citation was published in the Minor Planet Center on 6 August 2003 ( M.P.C. 49281 ). Description Itokawa is an S-type asteroid . Radar imaging by Goldstone in 2001 observed an ellipsoid 630 ± 60 m long and 250 ± 30 m wide. The Hayabusa mission confirmed these findings and also suggested that Itokawa may be a contact binary formed by two or more smaller asteroids that have gravitated toward each other and stuck together. The Hayabusa images show a surprising lack of impact craters and a very rough surface studded with boulders, described by the mission team as a 'rubble pile'. Furthermore, the density of the asteroid is too low for it to be made from solid rock. This would mean that Itokawa is not a monolith but rather a ' rubble pile ' formed from fragments that have cohered over time. Based on Yarkovsky–O'Keefe–Radzievskii–Paddack effect measurements, a small section of Itokawa is estimated to have a density of 2.9 g/cm³, whereas a larger section is estimated to have a density of 1.8 g/cm³. Play media This artist’s impression, based on detailed spacecraft observations, shows the strange peanut-shaped asteroid Itokawa. Exploration In 2000, it was selected as the target of Japan's Hayabusa mission. The probe arrived in the vicinity of Itokawa on 12 September 2005 and initially "parked" in an asteroid–Sun line at 20 km (12 mi), and later 7 km (4.3 mi), from the asteroid (Itokawa's gravity was too weak to provide an orbit, so the spacecraft adjusted its orbit around the Sun until it matched the asteroid's). Hayabusa landed on 20 November for thirty minutes, but it failed to operate a device designed to collect soil samples. On 25 November, a second landing and sampling sequence was attempted. The sample capsule was returned to Earth and landed at Woomera, South Australia on 13 June 2010, around 13:51 UTC (23:21 local). On 16 November 2010, the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency reported that dust collected during Hayabusa's voyage was indeed from the asteroid. Surface features Names of major surface features were proposed by Hayabusa scientists and accepted by the Working Group for Planetary System Nomenclature of the International Astronomical Union . Also, the Hayabusa science team is using working names for smaller surface features. The following tables list the names of geological features on the asteroid. No naming conventions have been disclosed for surface features on Itokawa. Craters Regiones Regiones (geologically distinct areas) on Itokawa. Itokawa Samples Analysis of particles reported in August 2011 Schematic view of 25143 Itokawa The 26 August 2011 issue of Science devoted six articles to findings based on dust that Hayabusa had collected from Itokawa. Scientists' analysis suggested that Itokawa was probably made up from interior fragments of a larger asteroid that broke apart. Dust collected from the asteroid surface is thought to have been exposed there for about eight million years. Scientists used varied techniques of chemistry and mineralogy to analyze the dust from Itokawa. Itokawa's composition was found to match the common type of meteorites known as "low-total-iron, low metal ordinary chondrites ". Another team of scientists determined that the dark iron color on the surface of Itokawa was the result of abrasion by micrometeoroids and high-speed particles from the Sun which had converted the normally whitish iron oxide coloring. 2018 Hayabusa Results Two separate groups report water in different Itokawa particles. Jin et al. report water in low-calcium pyroxene grains. The water's isotope level corresponds with inner solar system and carbonaceous chondrite water isotope levels. Daly et al. report "OH and H2O" apparently formed by implantation of solar wind hydrogen. The rims of an olivine particle "show an enrichment of up to ~1.2 at % in OH and H20". The water concentrations of the Itokawa grains would indicate an estimated BSI (Bulk Silicate Itokawa) water content in line with Earth's bulk water, and that Itokawa had been a "water-rich asteroid". See also (341843) 2008 EV 5 