Fédération_Aéronautique_Internationale
 The Fédération aéronautique internationale ( FAI ; English: World Air Sports Federation ), is the world governing body for air sports . It was founded on 14 October 1905, and is headquartered in Lausanne , Switzerland. It maintains world records for aeronautical activities including ballooning , aeromodeling , unmanned aerial vehicles (drones) and also for human spaceflight . History The FAI was founded at a conference held in Paris 12–14 October 1905, which was organised following a resolution passed by the Olympic Congress held in Brussels on 10 June 1905 calling for the creation of an Association "to regulate the sport of flying, ... the various aviation meetings and advance the science and sport of Aeronautics." The conference was attended by representatives from 8 countries: Belgium ( Aero Club Royal de Belgique , founded 1901), France ( Aéro-Club de France , 1898), Germany ( Deutscher Aero Club e.V. ), Great Britain ( Royal Aero Club , 1901), Italy ( Aero Club d'Italia , 1904), Spain ( Real Aero Club de España , 1905), Switzerland ( Aero-Club der Schweiz , 1900) and the United States ( Aero Club of America , 1905). On 2 February 2017 the FAI announced its new strategic partnership with international asset management firm Noosphere Ventures . FAI Secretary General Susanne Schödel, FAI President Frits Brink and Noosphere Ventures Managing Partner Max Polyakov signed the agreement, making Noosphere Ventures FAI’s Global Technical Partner. Activities The FAI is the international governing body for the following activities: Aerobatics through the FAI Aerobatics Commission ("Commission Internationale de Voltige Aerienne" – CIVA) Aeromodeling and drones through the FAI Aeromodelling Commission ("Commission Internationale d'Aero-Modelisme" – CIAM) Ballooning through the FAI Ballooning Commission ("Commission Internationale de l'Aérostation" – CIA) General aviation through the FAI General Aviation Commission ("General Aviation Commission" – GAC) Gliding through the FAI Gliding Commission ("International Gliding Commission – IGC") Hang gliding & Paragliding through the FAI Hang Gliding & Paragliding Commission ("Commission Internationale de Vol Libre – CIVL) Human-powered aircraft through the FAI Amateur-Built and Experimental Aircraft Commission ("Commission Internationale des Aéronefs de Construction Amateur – CIACA") Microlighting and Paramotoring through the FAI Microlight & Paramotor Commission ("Commission Internationale de Microaviation – CIMA) Parachuting through the FAI Parachuting Commission (" International Parachuting Commission – IPC ) Rotorcraft through the FAI Rotorcraft Commission ("Commission Internationale de giraviation – CIG) The FAI establishes the standards for records in the activities. Where these are air sports , the FAI also oversees international competitions at world and continental levels, and also organizes the World Air Games and FAI World Grand Prix . The FAI keeps records set in human spaceflight , through the FAI Astronautic Records Commission ("International Astronautic Records Commission – ICARE) The FAI also organises the FAI International Drones Conference and Expo. This event offers a platform for organisations, businesses and individuals to discuss how drones are used today and to create a framework for how they will be used and impact on our lives in the future. Records 1971 USSR commemorative stamp depicting Yuri A. Gagarin Gold Medal established by FAI Among the FAI's responsibilities are the verification of record-breaking flights. For a flight to be registered as a "World Record," it has to comply with the FAI's strict rules, which include a proviso that the record must exceed the previous record by a certain percentage. Since the late 1930s, military aircraft have dominated some classes of record for powered aircraft such as speed, distance, payload, and height, though other classes are regularly claimed by civilians. Some records are claimed by countries as their own, even though their achievements fail to meet FAI standards. These claims are not typically granted the status of official records. For example, Yuri Gagarin earned recognition for the first manned spaceflight, despite failing to meet FAI requirements. The FAI initially did not recognize the achievement because he did not land in his Vostok spacecraft (he ejected from it), but later it recognized that Gagarin was the first human to fly into space. The FAI then established "The Yuri A. Gagarin Gold Medal" , which has been awarded since 1968. Classes Record flight diploma issued by the FAI The following types of craft have records: Class A Free Balloons Class B Airships Class C Aeroplanes Class CS Solar-Powered Aeroplanes Class D Gliders & Motorgliders Class E Rotorcraft Class F Model Aircraft Class F1 – Free flight Class F2 – Control line Class F3 – Radio control F3K - Discus Launch Glider F3F - Slope Soaring Class F4 – Scale model aircraft Class F5 – Electrically powered model aircraft Class F8 - Autonomous flight (created by CIAM in 2006, later retired) Class G Parachuting Class H Vertical Take-off and Landing (VTOL) Aeroplanes Class I Manpowered aircraft Class K Spacecraft Class M Tilt-Wing/Tilt Engine Aircraft Class N Short Take-off and Landing (STOL) Aeroplanes Class O Hang Gliding & Paragliding Class P Aerospacecraft Class R Microlights and Paramotors Class S Space Models Class U Unmanned aerial vehicle Some of the records Awards The FAI Gold Air Medal was established in 1924 and was first awarded in 1925. It is reserved for those who have contributed greatly to the development of aeronautics by their activities, work, achievements, initiative or devotion to the cause of Aviation. The FAI has also awarded the Paul Tissandier Diploma since 1952 to those who have served the cause of aviation in general and sporting aviation in particular. Diplome Paul Tissandier The FAI also makes awards for each of the following air sports. Awards for Ballooning: The Montgolfier Ballooning Diploma The Santos Dumont Gold Airship Medal Awards for General Aviation: The Charles Lindbergh General Aviation Diploma Awards for Gliding: The Lilienthal Gliding Medal The Pelagia Majewska Gliding Medal The Pirat Gehriger Diploma Awards for Rotorcraft: The FAI Gold Rotorcraft Medal Awards for Parachuting: The FAI Gold Parachuting Medal The Leonardo da Vinci Parachuting Diploma The Faust Vrancic Medal Awards for Aeromodelling: The FAI Aeromodelling Gold Medal The Andrei Tupolev Aeromodelling Medal The Alphonse Penaud Aeromodelling Diploma The Antonov Aeromodelling Diploma The Andrei Tupolev Aeromodelling Diploma The Frank Ehling Diploma Awards for Aerobatics: The Leon Biancotto Aerobatics Diploma Awards for Astronautics: The Yuri A. Gagarin Gold Medal The V.M. Komarov Diploma The Korolev Diploma The Odyssey Diploma Awards for Hang Gliding: The Pepe Lopes Medal The FAI Hang Gliding Diploma Awards for Microlight Aviation: The Colibri Diploma The Ann Welch Diploma Awards for Aviation and Space Education: The Nile Gold Medal Awards for Amateur-Built Aircraft: The Phoenix Diploma The Phoenix Group Diploma The Henri Mignet Diploma FAI Young Artists Contest The FAI Young Artists Contest is an international painting competition for youngsters between the ages of 6 and 17. Each FAI Member Country organises the contest in their country, and the national winners are submitted to the International Jury each year. Members Active members Associate members Affiliate members Temporary members Suspended members See also Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile Fédération Internationale de Motocyclisme Hot air ballooning List of spaceflight records 