Lagrangian_point
 Smaller objects (green) at the Lagrange points each remain in the same relative position. At any other point, gravitational forces would pull a small object into an orbit around either one of the two bodies, in a non-stable position relative to the other body. Lagrange points in the Sun–Earth system (not to scale) – a small object at any one of the five points will hold its relative position. An example of a spacecraft at Sun–Earth L2 WMAP · Earth In celestial mechanics , the Lagrangian points ( / l ə ˈ ɡ r ɑː n dʒ i ən / also Lagrange points , L-points , or libration points ) are the points near two large bodies in orbit where a smaller object will maintain its position relative to the large orbiting bodies. At other locations, a small object would go into its own orbit around one of the large bodies, but at the Lagrangian points the gravitational forces of the two large bodies, the centripetal force of orbital motion, and (for certain points) the Coriolis acceleration all match up in a way that cause the small object to maintain a stable or nearly stable position relative to the large bodies. There are five such points, labeled L 1 to L 5 , all in the orbital plane of the two large bodies, for each given combination of two orbital bodies. For instance, there are five Lagrangian points L 1 to L 5 for the Sun-Earth system, and in a similar way there are five different Langrangian points for the Earth-Moon system. L 1 , L 2 , and L 3 are on the line through the centers of the two large bodies. L 4 and L 5 each form an equilateral triangle with the centers of the large bodies. L 4 and L 5 are stable, which implies that objects can orbit around them in a rotating coordinate system tied to the two large bodies. Several planets have trojan satellites near their L 4 and L 5 points with respect to the Sun. Jupiter has more than a million of these trojans. Artificial satellites have been placed at L 1 and L 2 with respect to the Sun and Earth , and with respect to the Earth and the Moon . The Lagrangian points have been proposed for uses in space exploration. History The three collinear Lagrange points (L 1 , L 2 , L 3 ) were discovered by Leonhard Euler a few years before Joseph-Louis Lagrange discovered the remaining two. In 1772, Lagrange published an "Essay on the three-body problem ". In the first chapter he considered the general three-body problem. From that, in the second chapter, he demonstrated two special constant-pattern solutions , the collinear and the equilateral, for any three masses, with circular orbits . Lagrange points The five Lagrangian points are labeled and defined as follows: L 1 point The L 1 point lies on the line defined by the two large masses M 1 and M 2 , and between them. It is the most intuitively understood of the Lagrangian points: the one where the gravitational attraction of M 2 partially cancels M 1 's gravitational attraction. Explanation An object that orbits the Sun more closely than Earth would normally have a shorter orbital period than Earth, but that ignores the effect of Earth's own gravitational pull. If the object is directly between Earth and the Sun, then Earth's gravity counteracts some of the Sun's pull on the object, and therefore increases the orbital period of the object. The closer to Earth the object is, the greater this effect is. At the L 1 point, the orbital period of the object becomes exactly equal to Earth's orbital period. L 1 is about 1.5 million kilometers from Earth, or 0.01 au , 1/100th the distance to the Sun. L 2 point The L 2 point lies on the line through the two large masses, beyond the smaller of the two. Here, the gravitational forces of the two large masses balance the centrifugal effect on a body at L 2 . Explanation On the opposite side of Earth from the Sun, the orbital period of an object would normally be greater than that of Earth. The extra pull of Earth's gravity decreases the orbital period of the object, and at the L 2 point that orbital period becomes equal to Earth's. Like L 1 , L 2 is about 1.5 million kilometers or 0.01 au from Earth. L 3 point The L 3 point lies on the line defined by the two large masses, beyond the larger of the two. Explanation Within the Sun-Earth system, the L 3 point exists on the opposite side of the Sun, a little outside Earth's orbit and slightly further from the Sun than Earth is. This placement occurs because the Sun is also affected by Earth's gravity and so orbits around the two bodies' barycenter , which is well inside the body of the Sun. At the L 3 point, the combined pull of Earth and Sun cause the object to orbit with the same period as Earth. L 4 and L 5 points Gravitational accelerations at L 4 The L 4 and L 5 points lie at the third corners of the two equilateral triangles in the plane of orbit whose common base is the line between the centers of the two masses, such that the point lies behind (L 5 ) or ahead (L 4 ) of the smaller mass with regard to its orbit around the larger mass. The triangular points (L 4 and L 5 ) are stable equilibria, provided that the ratio of M 1 / M 2 is greater than 24.96. This is the case for the Sun–Earth system, the Sun–Jupiter system, and, by a smaller margin , the Earth–Moon system. When a body at these points is perturbed, it moves away from the point, but the factor opposite of that which is increased or decreased by the perturbation (either gravity or angular momentum-induced speed) will also increase or decrease, bending the object's path into a stable, kidney bean -shaped orbit around the point (as seen in the corotating frame of reference). In contrast to L 4 and L 5 , where stable equilibrium exists, the points L 1 , L 2 , and L 3 are positions of unstable equilibrium . Any object orbiting at L 1 , L 2 , or L 3 will tend to fall out of orbit; it is therefore rare to find natural objects there, and spacecraft inhabiting these areas must employ station keeping in order to maintain their position. Natural objects at Lagrangian points It is common to find objects at or orbiting the L 4 and L 5 points of natural orbital systems. These are commonly called " trojans ". In the 20th century, asteroids discovered orbiting at the Sun– Jupiter L 4 and L 5 points were named after characters from Homer 's Iliad . Asteroids at the L 4 point, which leads Jupiter, are referred to as the " Greek camp ", whereas those at the L 5 point are referred to as the " Trojan camp ". Other examples of natural objects orbiting at Lagrange points: The Sun–Earth L 4 and L 5 points contain interplanetary dust and at least one asteroid, 2010 TK 7 , detected in October 2010 by Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) and announced during July 2011. The Earth–Moon L 4 and L 5 points contain interplanetary dust in what are called Kordylewski clouds . Although the Hiten spacecraft's Munich Dust Counter (MDC) detected no increase in dust during its passes through these points in 1992, their presence was confirmed in 2018 by a team of Hungarian astronomers and physicists . Stability at these specific points is greatly complicated by solar gravitational influence. Recent observations suggest that the Sun– Neptune L 4 and L 5 points, known as the Neptune trojans , may be very thickly populated, containing large bodies an order of magnitude more numerous than the Jupiter trojans. Several asteroids also orbit near the Sun-Jupiter L 3 point, called the Hilda family . The Saturnian moon Tethys has two smaller moons in its L 4 and L 5 points, Telesto and Calypso . The Saturnian moon Dione also has two Lagrangian co-orbitals, Helene at its L 4 point and Polydeuces at L 5 . The moons wander azimuthally about the Lagrangian points, with Polydeuces describing the largest deviations, moving up to 32° away from the Saturn–Dione L 5 point. Tethys and Dione are hundreds of times more massive than their "escorts" (see the moons' articles for exact diameter figures; masses are not known in several cases), and Saturn is far more massive still, which makes the overall system stable. One version of the giant impact hypothesis suggests that an object named Theia formed at the Sun–Earth L 4 or L 5 points and crashed into Earth after its orbit destabilized, forming the Moon. Mars has four known co-orbital asteroids ( 5261 Eureka , 1999 UJ 7 , 1998 VF 31 and 2007 NS 2 ), all at its Lagrangian points. Earth's companion object 3753 Cruithne is in a relationship with Earth that is somewhat trojan-like, but that is different from a true trojan. Cruithne occupies one of two regular solar orbits , one of them slightly smaller and faster than Earth's, and the other slightly larger and slower. It periodically alternates between these two orbits due to close encounters with Earth. When it is in the smaller, faster orbit and approaches Earth, it gains orbital energy from Earth and moves up into the larger, slower orbit. It then falls farther and farther behind Earth, and eventually Earth approaches it from the other direction. Then Cruithne gives up orbital energy to Earth, and drops back into the smaller orbit, thus beginning the cycle anew. The cycle has no noticeable impact on the length of the year, because Earth's mass is over 20 billion ( 7010200000000000000♠ 2 × 10 ) times more than that of 3753 Cruithne. Epimetheus and Janus , satellites of Saturn, have a similar relationship, though they are of similar masses and so actually exchange orbits with each other periodically. (Janus is roughly 4 times more massive but still light enough for its orbit to be altered.) Another similar configuration is known as orbital resonance , in which orbiting bodies tend to have periods of a simple integer ratio , due to their interaction. In a binary star system, the Roche lobe has its apex located at L 1 ; if a star overflows its Roche lobe, then it will lose matter to its companion star . Mathematical details A contour plot of the effective potential due to gravity and the centrifugal force of a two-body system in a rotating frame of reference. The arrows indicate the gradients of the potential around the five Lagrange points—downhill toward them ( red ) or away from them ( blue ). Counterintuitively, the L 4 and L 5 points are the high points of the potential. At the points themselves these forces are balanced. Visualisation of the relationship between the Lagrangian points (red) of a planet (blue) orbiting a star (yellow) anticlockwise, and the effective potential in the plane containing the orbit (grey rubber-sheet model with purple contours of equal potential). Click for animation. Lagrangian points are the constant-pattern solutions of the restricted three-body problem . For example, given two massive bodies in orbits around their common barycenter , there are five positions in space where a third body, of comparatively negligible mass , could be placed so as to maintain its position relative to the two massive bodies. As seen in a rotating reference frame that matches the angular velocity of the two co-orbiting bodies, the gravitational fields of two massive bodies combined providing the centripetal force at the Lagrangian points, allowing the smaller third body to be relatively stationary with respect to the first two. L 1 The location of L 1 is the solution to the following equation, gravitation providing the centripetal force: where r is the distance of the L 1 point from the smaller object, R is the distance between the two main objects, and M 1 and M 2 are the masses of the large and small object, respectively. Solving this for r involves solving a quintic function , but if the mass of the smaller object ( M 2 ) is much smaller than the mass of the larger object ( M 1 ) then L 1 and L 2 are at approximately equal distances r from the smaller object, equal to the radius of the Hill sphere , given by: This distance can be described as being such that the orbital period , corresponding to a circular orbit with this distance as radius around M 2 in the absence of M 1 , is that of M 2 around M 1 , divided by √ 3 ≈ 1.73: L 2 The location of L 2 is the solution to the following equation, gravitation providing the centripetal force: with parameters defined as for the L 1 case. Again, if the mass of the smaller object ( M 2 ) is much smaller than the mass of the larger object ( M 1 ) then L 2 is at approximately the radius of the Hill sphere , given by: L 3 The location of L 3 is the solution to the following equation, gravitation providing the centripetal force: with parameters defined as for the L 1 and L 2 cases except that r now indicates how much closer L 3 is to the more massive object than the smaller object. If the mass of the smaller object ( M 2 ) is much smaller than the mass of the larger object ( M 1 ) then : L 4 and L 5 The reason these points are in balance is that, at L 4 and L 5 , the distances to the two masses are equal. Accordingly, the gravitational forces from the two massive bodies are in the same ratio as the masses of the two bodies, and so the resultant force acts through the barycenter of the system; additionally, the geometry of the triangle ensures that the resultant acceleration is to the distance from the barycenter in the same ratio as for the two massive bodies. The barycenter being both the center of mass and center of rotation of the three-body system, this resultant force is exactly that required to keep the smaller body at the Lagrange point in orbital equilibrium with the other two larger bodies of system. (Indeed, the third body need not have negligible mass.) The general triangular configuration was discovered by Lagrange in work on the three-body problem . Net radial acceleration of a point orbiting along the Earth-Moon line. Radial acceleration The radial acceleration a of an object in orbit at a point along the line passing through both bodies is given by: Where r is the distance from the large body M 1 and sgn( x ) is the sign function of x . The terms in this function represent respectively: force from M 1 ; force from M 2 ; and centrifugal force. The points L 3 , L 1 , L 2 occur where the acceleration is zero — see chart at right. Stability Although the L 1 , L 2 , and L 3 points are nominally unstable, there are (unstable) periodic orbits called "halo" orbits around these points in a three-body system. A full n -body dynamical system such as the Solar System does not contain these periodic orbits, but does contain quasi-periodic (i.e. bounded but not precisely repeating) orbits following Lissajous-curve trajectories. These quasi-periodic Lissajous orbits are what most of Lagrangian-point space missions have used until now. Although they are not perfectly stable, a modest effort of station keeping keeps a spacecraft in a desired Lissajous orbit for a long time. Also, for Sun–Earth-L 1 missions, it is preferable for the spacecraft to be in a large-amplitude (100,000–200,000 km or 62,000–124,000 mi) Lissajous orbit around L 1 than to stay at L 1 , because the line between Sun and Earth has increased solar interference on Earth–spacecraft communications. Similarly, a large-amplitude Lissajous orbit around L 2 keeps a probe out of Earth's shadow and therefore ensures continuous illumination of its solar panels. The L 4 and L 5 points are stable provided that the mass of the primary body (e.g. the Earth) is at least 25 times the mass of the secondary body (e.g. the Moon). The Earth is over 81 times the mass of the Moon (the Moon is 1.23% of the mass of the Earth ). Although the L 4 and L 5 points are found at the top of a "hill", as in the effective potential contour plot above, they are nonetheless stable. The reason for the stability is a second-order effect: as a body moves away from the exact Lagrange position, Coriolis acceleration (which depends on the velocity of an orbiting object and cannot be modeled as a contour map) curves the trajectory into a path around (rather than away from) the point. Solar System values This table lists sample values of L 1 , L 2 , and L 3 within the solar system. Calculations assume the two bodies orbit in a perfect circle with separation equal to the semimajor axis and no other bodies are nearby. Distances are measured from the larger body's center of mass with L 3 showing a negative location. The percentage columns show how the distances compare to the semimajor axis. E.g. for the Moon, L 1 is located 7008326400000000000♠ 326 400 km from Earth's center, which is 84.9% of the Earth-Moon distance or 15.1% in front of the Moon; L 2 is located 7008448900000000000♠ 448 900 km from Earth's center, which is 116.8% of the Earth-Moon distance or 16.8% beyond the Moon; and L 3 is located 2991618300000000000♠ −381 700 km from Earth's center, which is 99.3% of the Earth-Moon distance or 0.7084% in front of the Moon's 'negative' position. Spaceflight applications Sun–Earth The satellite ACE in an orbit around Sun-Earth L 1 . Sun–Earth L 1 is suited for making observations of the Sun–Earth system. Objects here are never shadowed by Earth or the Moon and, if observing Earth, always view the sunlit hemisphere. The first mission of this type was the 1978 International Sun Earth Explorer 3 (ISEE-3) mission used as an interplanetary early warning storm monitor for solar disturbances. Since June 2015, DSCOVR has orbited the L 1 point. Conversely it is also useful for space-based solar telescopes , because it provides an uninterrupted view of the Sun and any space weather (including the solar wind and coronal mass ejections ) reaches L 1 a few hours before Earth. Solar telescopes currently located around L 1 include the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory and Advanced Composition Explorer . Sun–Earth L 2 is a good spot for space-based observatories. Because an object around L 2 will maintain the same relative position with respect to the Sun and Earth, shielding and calibration are much simpler. It is, however, slightly beyond the reach of Earth's umbra , so solar radiation is not completely blocked at L 2 . (Real spacecraft generally orbit around L 2 , avoiding partial eclipses of the Sun to maintain a constant temperature.) From locations near L 2 , the Sun, Earth and Moon are relatively close together in the sky; this means that a large sunshade with the telescope on the dark-side can allow the telescope to cool passively to around 50 K – this is especially helpful for infrared astronomy and observations of the cosmic microwave background . The James Webb Space Telescope is due to be positioned at L 2 . Sun–Earth L 3 was a popular place to put a " Counter-Earth " in pulp science fiction and comic books . Once space-based observation became possible via satellites and probes, it was shown to hold no such object. The Sun–Earth L 3 is unstable and could not contain a natural object, large or small, for very long. This is because the gravitational forces of the other planets are stronger than that of Earth ( Venus , for example, comes within 0.3 AU of this L 3 every 20 months). A spacecraft orbiting near Sun–Earth L 3 would be able to closely monitor the evolution of active sunspot regions before they rotate into a geoeffective position, so that a 7-day early warning could be issued by the NOAA Space Weather Prediction Center . Moreover, a satellite near Sun–Earth L 3 would provide very important observations not only for Earth forecasts, but also for deep space support (Mars predictions and for manned mission to near-Earth asteroids ). In 2010, spacecraft transfer trajectories to Sun–Earth L 3 were studied and several designs were considered. Missions to Lagrangian points generally orbit the points rather than occupy them directly. Another interesting and useful property of the collinear Lagrangian points and their associated Lissajous orbits is that they serve as "gateways" to control the chaotic trajectories of the Interplanetary Transport Network . Earth–Moon Earth–Moon L 1 allows comparatively easy access to Lunar and Earth orbits with minimal change in velocity and this has as an advantage to position a half-way manned space station intended to help transport cargo and personnel to the Moon and back. Earth–Moon L 2 has been used for a communications satellite covering the Moon's far side, for example Queqiao launched in May 2018 , and would be "an ideal location" for a propellant depot as part of the proposed depot-based space transportation architecture. Sun–Venus Scientists at the B612 Foundation are planning to use Venus 's L 3 point to position their planned Sentinel telescope , which aims to look back towards Earth's orbit and compile a catalogue of near-Earth asteroids . Sun–Mars In 2017, Nasa proposed the idea of positioning a magnetic dipole shield at the Sun-Mars L 1 point for use as an artificial magnetosphere for Mars. The idea is that this would protect the planet's atmosphere from the Sun's radiation and solar winds. Lagrangian spacecraft and missions Spacecraft at Sun–Earth L 1 International Sun Earth Explorer 3 (ISEE-3) began its mission at the Sun–Earth L 1 before leaving to intercept a comet in 1982. The Sun–Earth L 1 is also the point to which the Reboot ISEE-3 mission was attempting to return the craft as the first phase of a recovery mission (as of September 25, 2014 all efforts have failed and contact was lost). Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) is stationed in a halo orbit at L 1 , and the Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE) in a Lissajous orbit . WIND is also at L 1 . Deep Space Climate Observatory (DSCOVR), launched on 11 February 2015, began orbiting L 1 on 8 June 2015 to study the solar wind and its effects on Earth. DSCOVR is unofficially known as GORESAT, because it carries a camera always oriented to Earth and capturing full-frame photos of the planet similar to the Blue Marble . This concept was proposed by then-Vice President of the United States Al Gore in 1998 and was a centerpiece in his film An Inconvenient Truth . LISA Pathfinder (LPF) was launched on 3 December 2015, and arrived at L 1 on 22 January 2016, where, among other experiments, it tested the technology needed by (e)LISA to detect gravitational waves. LISA Pathfinder used an instrument consisting of two small gold alloy cubes. Spacecraft at Sun–Earth L 2 Spacecraft at the Sun–Earth L 2 point are in a Lissajous orbit until decommissioned, when they are sent into a heliocentric graveyard orbit . 1 October 2001 – October 2010: Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe November 2003 – April 2004: WIND , then it returned to Earth orbit before going to L 1 where it still remains July 2009 – 29 April 2013: Herschel Space Telescope 3 July 2009 – 21 October 2013: Planck Space Observatory 25 August 2011 – April 2012: Chang'e 2 , from where it travelled to 4179 Toutatis and then into deep space January 2014 – 2018: Gaia Space Observatory 2020: Euclid Space Telescope 2021: James Webb Space Telescope will use a halo orbit 2024: Wide Field Infrared Survey Telescope (WFIRST) will use a halo orbit 2028: Advanced Telescope for High Energy Astrophysics (ATHENA) will use a halo orbit Spacecraft at Earth–Moon L 2 Queqiao entered orbit around the Earth–Moon L 2 on 14 June 2018. It serves as a relay satellite for the Chang'e 4 lunar far-side lander, which cannot communicate directly with Earth. Past and current missions Future and proposed missions See also Astronomy portal Spaceflight portal Co-orbital configuration Euler's three-body problem Gegenschein Hill sphere Horseshoe orbit Klemperer rosette L 5 Society Lagrange point colonization Lagrangian mechanics Lissajous orbit List of objects at Lagrangian points Lunar space elevator Oberth effect Notes ^ Actually 25 + √ 621 / 2 ≈ 7001249599357944000♠ 24.959 935 7944 