Planetary_flyby
 Sending a space probe past a planet or dwarf planet Plot of Mariner 10 flyby of planet Venus in February 1974. A planetary flyby is the act of sending a space probe past a planet or a dwarf planet close enough to record scientific data. This is a subset of the overall concept of a flyby in spaceflight. Flybys commonly use gravity assists to "slingshot" a space probe on its journey to its primary objective, but may themselves be used as primary means. The first flyby of another planet with a functioning spacecraft took place on December 14, 1962, when Mariner 2 zoomed by the planet Venus . New Horizons performed flyby maneuvers of Jupiter, Pluto and its moons in the 21st century. This type of maneuver allowed it to reach Pluto at high velocity without the complications of slowing down, after which it proceeded into the Kuiper belt on a solar system escape trajectory. For comparison, New Horizons reached Jupiter in just over year (launched in January 2006) it flewby in February 2007. In contrast, Galileo spacecraft took about six years (launched 1989, arrive at Jupiter 1995) and when it got there it had expend fuel to slow down to enter orbit, and was overall much heavier. The atmospheric entry probe did not slow down but required an advanced entry shield and the atmosphere of Jupiter to slow down. (See also Aerobraking ) There also an even closer version of flyby, a sort of fly in where the spacecraft actually enters and passes through a bodies atmosphere, called a Aerogravity assist . This could be compared to the natural phenomenon of Earth-grazing fireball List of planetary flybys Gallery The Galileo flybys featured both purely gravitional assists and scientific experiments See also Mariner program Mars program Pioneer program Vega program Venera Voyager program Zond program List of Earth flybys Mars flyby Timeline of the Space Race Timeline of Solar System exploration Notes ^ The International Astronomical Union classifies Charon as a moon . See Charon (moon)#Classification for details. 