Plutino
 In astronomy , the plutinos are a dynamical group of trans-Neptunian objects in the outermost region of the Solar System that orbit in 2:3 mean-motion resonance with Neptune . This means that for every two orbits a plutino makes, Neptune orbits three times. The dwarf planet Pluto is the largest member and namesake of this group. Plutinos are named after mythological creatures associated with the underworld. Plutinos form the inner part of the Kuiper belt and represent about a quarter of the known Kuiper belt objects . They are the largest class of the resonant trans-Neptunian objects (also see adjunct box with hierarchical listing) . Aside from Pluto itself, the first plutino, (385185) 1993 RO , was discovered on September 16, 1993. Orbits Some of the first known plutinos compared in size, albedo and colour Origin It is thought that objects that are currently in mean orbital resonances with Neptune initially followed independent heliocentric paths. As Neptune migrated outward early in the Solar System's history (see origins of the Kuiper belt ), the bodies it approached would have been scattered; during this process, some of them would have been captured into resonances. The 3:2 resonance is a low-order resonance and the strongest and most stable among all resonances. This is the main reason it contains the largest number of bodies. Orbital characteristics The distribution of Plutinos, and relative sizes, drawn 1 million times larger. While the majority of plutinos have low orbital inclinations , a substantial number of them follow orbits similar to that of Pluto, with inclinations in the 10–25° range and eccentricities around 0.2–0.25, resulting in perihelia inside (or close to) the orbit of Neptune and aphelia close to the main Kuiper belt 's outer edge (where objects have 1:2 resonance with Neptune). The orbital periods of plutinos cluster around 247.3 years (1.5 × Neptune's orbital period), varying by at most a few years from this value. Unusual plutinos include: 2005 TV 189 , which follows the most highly inclined orbit (34.5°) (15875) 1996 TP 66 , which has the most elliptical orbit (its eccentricity is 0.33), with the perihelion halfway between Uranus and Neptune (470308) 2007 JH 43 following a quasi-circular orbit 2002 VX 130 lying almost perfectly on the ecliptic (inclination less than 1.5°) See also the comparison with the distribution of the cubewanos . Long-term stability The gravitational influence of Pluto is usually neglected given its small mass. However, the resonance width (the range of semi-axes compatible with the resonance) is very narrow and only a few times larger than Pluto’s Hill sphere (gravitational influence). Consequently, depending on the original eccentricity, some plutinos will be driven out of the resonance by interactions with Pluto. Numerical simulations suggest that the orbits of plutinos with an eccentricity 10%–30% smaller or larger than that of Pluto are not stable over Ga timescales. Orbital diagrams The motions of Orcus and Pluto in a rotating frame with a period equal to Neptune 's orbital period (holding Neptune stationary.) Orbits and sizes of the larger plutinos (and the reference non-plutino 2002 KX 14 ). Orbital eccentricity is represented by segments extending horizontally from perihelion to aphelion ; inclination is shown on the vertical axis. The distribution of plutinos (and the reference non-plutino 2002 KX 14 ). Small inserts show histograms for the distributions of orbital inclination and eccentricity. Brightest objects The plutinos brighter than H V =6 include: 